docs: triage proposal draft (#27298)
argoproj/argo-cd: docs/developer-guide/triage-proposal.md

(authors and revision history appear there).

**Authors :** Leonardo Luz Almeida and Reggie Voloshin  
**Status:** Proposal for discussion - not yet merged into the canonical [Code Contribution Guide](code-contributions.md).

## Overview

Because Argo CD handles critical production workloads with limited maintainer availability, every new feature, enhancement, and in some cases even bug fixes must be vetted for impact on compatibility, performance, scalability, stability, and security.

Given limited availability, maintainers need to focus on high-priority work while still giving the community a sense of release direction.

## Goals

Establish a guideline using an issue-first approach. The intent is to protect the codebase, prioritize maintainer work, and support roadmap planning:

* **No orphan PRs:** PRs should be associated with a GitHub issue that maintainers approved during triage.
* **Risk mitigation:** Triage checks that the idea matches project strategy so contributors and reviewers do not spend time on work that may be rejected.
* **Transparency:** Triage is performed openly on GitHub; the community is encouraged to participate.

> * **Order:** Issues are generally triaged in First-In-First-Out (FIFO) order. Business-critical or security fixes may take priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Order:** Issues are generally triaged in First-In-First-Out (FIFO) order. Regressions or issues materially impacting core user workflows may take priority.
```
Super nit picky, i was trying to change the verbiage to read with the spirit of "impacting existing core features". my intent was to disambiguate from a business workflow that may not be a critical argo cd feature.

* **Rotation:** Triage is handled by two Argo CD maintainers rotating weekly; rotation is defined in the contributor meeting.
* **Prioritization:** Triage gives maintainers visibility into requested features and bug fixes and supports clear prioritization of new issues.

> In discussion on the source doc, maintainers described this as a **guideline**, not rigid rules: trivial fixes and documentation-only changes are typical exceptions where strict issue-first process adds friction without much benefit.

Reviewer 2: I would just remove the source doc reference and start saying: "This proposal is a **guideline**..."

## Proposal

### Status triage

New issues are managed via the
[triage GitHub project board](https://github.com/orgs/argoproj/projects/37/views/2)

> by setting **Status** to one of:

Reviewer 2: Maybe add the user-story behind this board so ppl have clarity of the intention:

_As an Argo CD maintainer, while doing triage, I want to see the list of pending triage issues sorted by creation date so I can have full visibility and can change the triage status in one click._

* **To triage:** Default when issues are first created.
* **In discussion:** Under maintainer review; may include asking the reporter to attend a contributor meeting to present the issue.
* **Needs proposal:** Substantial behavior change or unclear upgrade/downgrade paths; a design proposal must be presented and approved before the issue can move to **Ready**.
* **Ready:** The proposal (or issue, if no proposal is required) is approved; implementation may begin by the creator or any community member.
* **Declined:** Rejected; the issue should state why (for example breaking change or strategic misalignment).

### Priority triage

> GitHub issues are prioritized with a **Priority** label (for example Critical, High, Medium, Low). Existing labels may need to be adjusted over time, as they have historically focused on bug severity rather than features.

Reviewer: What is our intent behind this label? To help maintainers review PRs? Implement issues/features? If I put up an issue / pr and it got labeled `priority=low`, I would certainly feel discouraged.

Author: I see your point, maybe we can use something like K8s uses:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/labels?q=priority
The goal is to help maintainers (and community) to focus on what is more important.

Maintainers should use priority to focus PR reviews and their own contributions.

> ### Triage team responsibilities

Reviewer 3: I don't think it is possible to achieve the goals of this proposal simply by setting guidelines and asking the maintainers on triage to perform the following tasks. The load is too big to have maintainers constantly triaging and the return of investment is low compared to having these maintainer reviewing and merging pull request.

I think this proposal is missing a crucial part where it suggests automation rules to perform the triage. This automation can be powered by [agentic workflow](https://github.github.com/gh-aw/introduction/overview/) such as https://github.com/githubnext/agentics. Or classic github actions when we want a deterministic output.

> * Aim for all issues opened in the current week to reach **Ready** or **Declined**. Items in **Needs proposal** can be discussed again at the next contributor meeting once a proposal exists, or asynchronously among maintainers.

Reviewer: Who decides if an issue should be `Ready` or `Declined`? Is it solely the decision of the triagers? 

It feels like a "commitment" to the contributor that maintainers shouldn't easily flip-flop on.

Author: I believe that for the non-obvious cases, the triagers may ask for more maiintainers' opinions about whether the issue is accepted or declined. This section is probably more relevant for proposals/issues that are semi-bug semi-feature. I believe most bug issues can be validated for reproduction during the triage week, the non-trivial ones may require more maintainers' opinions to reach a decision whether Ready or Declined.

* If a major issue appears during triage (serious regression or broad user impact), the rotating triage team should help get a maintainer or volunteer assigned to fix it.
* Aim for newly triaged issues to have a priority label.
* Because many older issues are untriaged, the team may optionally pick a few additional backlog issues (for example by comment or reaction count).

> * Identify **good first issue** candidates.

Reviewer: Love this, we need more of these!

* Optionally evaluate size (for example Small / Medium / Large); this was debated in the source doc and may be introduced gradually.
* Add high-priority issues to the next milestone when appropriate (they can be moved forward if plans change).

### Contributor meeting

> The weekly contributor meeting is the primary venue for live triage and for resolving **In discussion** status.

Reviewer 3: I think we should keep this meeting open for technical discussion to help the implementation of different issues.
Discussions on how to triage an issue should be limited a rare, just like discussions/requests to review a pull request.
